New Indexes chapter (#770)
neo4j/docs-cypher: modules/ROOT/pages/indexes/search-performance-indexes/using-indexes.adoc

:description: Information about how to use the search-performance indexes in Neo4j.
:test-skip: true

> = Using search-performance indexes

Reviewer: ```suggestion
= Understand the impact of indexes
```

Author: Going with "The impact of indexes on query performance"

Search-performance indexes enable quicker and more efficient pattern matching by solving a particular combination of node label/relationship type and property predicate. 

> They are used automatically by the Cypher planner in `MATCH` clauses, usually at the start of a query, to scan the graph for the most appropriate place to start the pattern-matching process.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The Cypher planner uses indexes to quickly find the starting points of patterns.
```

Stolen from later on.

By examining xref:planning-and-tuning/execution-plans.adoc[query execution plans], this page will explain the scenarios in which the various search-performance indexes are used to improve the performance of Cypher queries.
It will also provide some general heuristics for when to use indexes, and advice about how to avoid over-indexing.

[[graph-example]]
== Example graph

The examples on this page center around finding routes and points of interest in Central Park, New York, based on data provided by link:https://www.openstreetmap.org/[OpenStreetMap].
The data model contains two node labels:

> * `OSMNode` (Open Street Map Node) - a junction node with geo-spatial properties linking together routes from specific points.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `OSMNode` (Open Street Map Node) -- a junction node with geo-spatial properties linking together routes from specific points.
```

> * `PointOfInterest`  - a subcategory of `OSMNode`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* `PointOfInterest` -- a subcategory of `OSMNode`.
```

The data model also contains one relationship type: `ROUTE`, which specifies the distance in meters between the nodes in the graph.

image::using_indexes_example_graph.svg[width="600",role="middle"]

In total, the graph contains 69165 nodes (of which 188 have the label `PointOfInterest`) and 152077 `ROUTE` relationships.

To recreate the graph, download and import the link:https://github.com/neo4j-graph-examples/openstreetmap/blob/main/data/openstreetmap-50.dump[5.0 dump file] to an empty Neo4j database.
Dump files can be imported for both link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/aura/auradb/importing/import-database/[Aura] and link:{neo4j-docs-base-uri}/operations-manual/{page-version}/backup-restore/restore-dump/[on-prem] instances.

[[token-lookup-indexes]]
== Token lookup indexes

Two token lookup indexes are present by default when creating a Neo4j database.
They store copies of all node labels and relationship types in the database and only solve node label and relationship type predicates.

The following query footnote:[The example queries on this page are prepended with `PROFILE`. This both runs the query and generates its execution plan.

> For more information, see xref:planning-and-tuning/index.adoc#profile-and-explain[Execution plans and query tuning -> Note on PROFILE and EXPLAIN].], which counts the number of `PointOfInterest` nodes that have a `baseball` `type` value, will access the  node label lookup index:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For more information, see xref:planning-and-tuning/index.adoc#profile-and-explain[Execution plans and query tuning -> Note on PROFILE and EXPLAIN].], which counts the number of `PointOfInterest` nodes that have value `baseball` for the `type` property, will access the node label lookup index:
```

I didn't quite understand the meaning until I saw the example

| +Projection           |  1 | cache[n.name] AS `n.name`, n.type AS `n.type`                                           |              1 |    2 |       4 |                |                        |           |                     |
| |                     +----+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+                        |           |                     |
| +NodeIndexSeekByRange |  2 | RANGE INDEX n:PointOfInterest(name) WHERE name STARTS WITH $autostring_0, cache[n.name] |              1 |    2 |       3 |            248 |                    4/1 |     1.276 | Fused in Pipeline 0 |
+-----------------------+----+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 7, total allocated memory: 312
----

> The reason for is that range indexes store `STRING` values alphabetically.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This is because range indexes store `STRING` values alphabetically.
```

[[text-index-string-size]]
=== Text indexes and `STRING` sizes

The size of the indexed `STRING` properties is also relevant to the planner’s selection between range and text indexes. 

Range indexes have a maximum key size limit of around 8 kb.
This means that range indexes cannot be used to index `STRING` values larger than 8 kb.
Text indexes, on the other hand, have a maximum key size limit of around 32 kb.
As a result, they can be used to index `STRING` values up to that size.

For information about calculating the size of indexes, see link:https://neo4j.com/developer/kb/a-method-to-calculate-index-size/[Neo4j Knowledge Base -> A method to calculate the size of an index in Neo4j].

[[point-indexes]]
== Point indexes 

Point indexes solve predicates operating on spatial xref:values-and-types/spatial.adoc#spatial-values-point-type[`POINT`] values.
Point indexes are optimized for queries filtering for the xref:functions/spatial.adoc#functions-distance[distance] between property values, or for property values within a xref:functions/spatial.adoc#functions-withinBBox[bounding box].

> The following example creates a point index which is then accessed by a query that uses the `point.distance()` function to return the `name` and `type` of all `PointOfInterest` nodes within 100 meters of the  `William Shakespeare` statue:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The following example creates a point index which is then accessed through the `point.distance()` function to return the `name` and `type` of all `PointOfInterest` nodes within 100 meters of the  `William Shakespeare` statue:
```

| +NodeByLabelScan        |  6 | p2:PointOfInterest                                                                                   |            188 |  188 |     189 |            376 |                    2/0 |     0.533 | In Pipeline 0       |
+-------------------------+----+------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 4730, total allocated memory: 16952
----

For more information about the predicates supported by text indexes, see xref:indexes/search-performance-indexes/managing-indexes.adoc#point-indexes-supported-predicates[Managing search-performance indexes -> Point indexes: supported predicates].

[[point-index-config-settings]]
=== Point index configuration settings

It is possible to configure point indexes to only index properties within a specific geographical area.

> This is done by specifying either of the following settings in the `indexConfig` part of the `OPTIONS` clause when creating a point index:

Reviewer: xref to index creation config section

* `spatial.cartesian.min` and `spatial.cartesian.max`: used for xref:values-and-types/spatial.adoc#spatial-values-crs-cartesian[Cartesian 2D] coordinate systems.
* `spatial.cartesian-3d.min` and `spatial.cartesian-3d.max`: used for xref:values-and-types/spatial.adoc#spatial-values-crs-cartesian[Cartesian 3D] coordinate systems.
* `spatial.wgs-84.min` and `spatial.wgs-84.max`: used for xref:values-and-types/spatial.adoc#spatial-values-crs-geographic[WGS-84 2D] coordinate systems.
* `spatial.wgs-84-3d.min` and `spatial.wgs-84-3d.max`: used for xref:values-and-types/spatial.adoc#spatial-values-crs-geographic[WGS-84 3D] coordinate systems.

The `min` and `max` of each setting define the minimum and maximum bounds for the spatial data in each coordinate system. 

For example, the following index would only store `OSMNodes` in the northern half of Central Park:

.Create point index with configuration settings
[source, cypher]
----
CREATE POINT INDEX central_park_north
FOR (o:OSMNode) ON (o.location)
OPTIONS {
  indexConfig: {
    `spatial.wgs-84.min`:[40.7714, -73.9743],
    `spatial.wgs-84.max`:[40.7855, -73.9583]
  }
}
----

> Restricting the geographic area of a point index can improve the performance of spatial queries by making the index more efficient at retrieving the indexed `POINT` values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Restricting the geographic area of a point index can improve the performance of spatial queries.
```

Reviewer: If it always does, drop the `can`.

+-----------------+----+-----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 3, total allocated memory: 312
----

This plan now shows that, while a prefix search has been used to solve the `name` property predicate, the `lat` property predicate is no longer solved with an equality check, but rather with an existence check and an explicit xref:planning-and-tuning/operators/operators-detail.adoc#query-plan-filter[filter] operation afterward.
Note that if the `composite_2` index had not been dropped before the query was rerun, the planner would have used it instead of the `composite_3` index.

This is because, when using composite indexes, any predicate after a prefix search will automatically be planned as an existence check predicate. 

[[composite-index-rules]]
=== Composite index rules

As indicated in the previous section, composite indexes follow specific rules that are useful to know before using them.

> All rules concerning how composite indexes solve property predicates are listed below:

Reviewer: I'd drop both lines. I hope we wouldn't bring them up if they were not useful to know :grin:

| +NodeByLabelScan  |  3 | n:PointOfInterest |            188 |  188 |     189 |            376 |                  115/0 |     0.769 | Fused in Pipeline 0 |
+-------------------+----+-------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 562, total allocated memory: 472
----

The plan shows that neither of the two available indexes (range and text) on the `name` property is used to solve the predicate. 

However, if a query predicate is added which is able to exclude the presence of any `null` values, then an index can be used.
The following query shows this by adding a substring predicate to the above query:

.Query to count nodes with a `null` `name` value or nodes with a `name` property containing `'William'`
[source,cypher]
----
PROFILE
MATCH (n:PointOfInterest)
WHERE n.name IS NULL OR n.name CONTAINS 'William'
RETURN count(n) AS nodes
----

.Result
[role="queryresult",options="header,footer",cols="1*m"]
|===
| nodes
| 5
1+d|Rows:1
|===

> The query result now includes both the three nodes with an unset `name` value found in the previous query and the two nodes with a `name` value containing the `STRING` `'William'` (`William Shakespeare` and `William Tecumseh Sherman`).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The query result now includes both the three nodes with an unset `name` value found in the previous query and the two nodes with a `name` value containing `William` (`William Shakespeare` and `William Tecumseh Sherman`).
```

It gets quite heavy to see uppercase `STRING` all the time, and I'd say it really doesn't add anything. It couldn't be a property of any other type really.

Author: Yeah, in this case I guess it's fine to remove.

| +EagerAggregation |  1 | count(n) AS nodes                                          |              1 |    1 |       0 |             32 |                        |           |                     |
| |                 +----+------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+                        |           |                     |
| +NodeIndexScan    |  2 | RANGE INDEX n:PointOfInterest(name) WHERE name IS NOT NULL |            185 |  185 |     186 |            376 |                    0/1 |     0.691 | Fused in Pipeline 0 |
+-------------------+----+------------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 186, total allocated memory: 472
----

This plan shows that the previously created range index on the `name` property is now used to solve the predicate.

[[text-indexes-type-predicate-expressions]]
=== Text indexes and type predicate expressions

Text indexes require that predicates only include `STRING` properties.

> To use text indexes in situations where any of the queried properties may be either of an incompatible type or null rather than a STRING value, add the type predicate expression `IS {two-colons} STRING NOT NULL` (or its alias, introduced in Neo4j 5.14, `IS {two-colons} STRING!`) to the query.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
To use text indexes in situations where any of the queried properties may be either of an incompatible type or null rather than a `STRING` value, add the type predicate expression `IS {two-colons} STRING NOT NULL` (or its alias, introduced in Neo4j 5.14, `IS {two-colons} STRING!`) to the query.
```

[[type-constraints]]
=== Type constraints

_This feature was introduced in Neo4j 5.11._

For indexes that are compatible only with specific types (i.e. text and point indexes), the Cypher planner needs to deduce that a predicate will evaluate to `null` for non-compatible values in order to use the index.
If a predicate is not explicitly defined as the required type (`STRING` or `POINT`), this can lead to situations where a text or point index is not used.

Since xref:constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-examples-node-property-type[type constraints] guarantee that a property is always of the same type, they can be used to extend the scenarios in which text and point indexes are compatible with a predicate.

To show this, the following example will first drop the existing range index on the `name` property (this is necessary because type constraints only extend the compatibility of type-specific indexes - range indexes are not limited by a value type).
It will then run the same query with a `WHERE` predicate on the `name` property (for which there exists a previously created text index) before and after creating a type constraint, and compare the resulting execution plans.

> .Query range index

Reviewer: Wrong title

+-----------------+----+-----------------------------------------------------------+----------------+------+---------+----------------+------------------------+-----------+---------------------+

Total database accesses: 556, total allocated memory: 312
----

Because of the type constraint on the `name` property, the planner is now able to deduce that all `name` properties are of type `STRING`, and therefore use the available text index. 

Point indexes can be extended in the same way if a type constraint is created to ensure that all properties are `POINT` values.

Note that xref:constraints/examples.adoc#constraints-examples-node-property-existence[property existence constraints] do not currently leverage index use in the same way.

[[Heuristics]]
== Heuristics: deciding what to index

While it is impossible to give exact directions on when a search-performance index might be beneficial for a particular use-case, the following points provide some useful heuristics for when creating an index might improve query performance:

> * *Frequent property-based queries*: if particular node label/relationship type properties are used frequently for filtering or matching, consider creating an index on those properties. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* *Frequent property-based queries*: if some properties are used frequently for filtering or matching, consider creating an index on them. 
```

* *Complex queries*: if queries traverse complex paths in a graph (for example, by involving multiple hops and several layers of filtering), adding indexes to the properties used in those queries can improve query performance.
* *Experiment and test*: It is good practice to experiment with different indexes and query patterns, and to measure the performance of critical queries with and without different indexes to evaluate their effectiveness.

[[over-indexing]]
== Over-indexing: considerations and solutions

Search-performance indexes can significantly improve query performance.
They should, however, be used judiciously for the following reasons:

* *Storage space*: because each index is a secondary copy of the data in the primary database, each index essentially doubles the amount of storage space occupied by the indexed data.
* *Slower write queries*: adding indexes impacts the performance of write queries.
This is because indexes are updated with each write query. If a system needs to perform a lot of writes quickly, it may be counterproductive to have an index on the affected data entities.

> In other words, if write performance is crucial for a particular use case, it may be beneficial to only add indexes where they are necessary for read-query purposes.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
In other words, if write performance is crucial for a particular use case, it may be beneficial to only add indexes where they are necessary for read purposes.
```

Yes and no. A write often requires some form of read (i.e. create a relationship between two existing nodes, etc), so the absence of indexes can dramatically slow down writes as well. I think this is important to clarify.

For more information, see xref:indexes/search-performance-indexes/managing-indexes.adoc#listing-indexes-result-columns[Managing search-performance indexes -> Result columns for listing indexes].]

To return these values (along with other relevant information) for the indexes in a database, run the following query:

.Query to identify redundant indexes
[source,cypher]
----
SHOW INDEX YIELD name, type, entityType, labelsOrTypes, properties, lastRead, readCount, trackedSince
----

If any unused indexes are identified, it may be beneficial to delete them using the xref:indexes/search-performance-indexes/managing-indexes.adoc#drop-indexes[`DROP INDEX`] command.

[[summary]]
== Summary

* Range indexes can be used to solve most predicates.

* Text indexes are used over range indexes for `CONTAINS` and `ENDS WITH` predicates on `STRING` properties, and if the queried `STRING` properties exceed 8 kb.

* Point indexes are used when queries filter on distances and bounding boxes.

> * Token lookup indexes are not defined in this order since they never solve the same predicates as other indexes.

Reviewer: What does "not defined in this order" mean? :thinking:

Author: Yes, that is not clear. Let's just say "only solve node label and relationship type expressions, and cannot solve any predicates involving properties."

Deleting them will negatively impact query performance.

* Composite indexes are only used if the query filters on all properties indexed by the composite index.
The order in which the properties are defined when creating a composite index impacts how the planner solves query predicates.

* Queries ordering results using `ORDER BY` can leverage the pre-existing order in range indexes and thereby improve query performance.

* A Cypher query can use several indexes if the planner deems it beneficial to the performance of a query.

> * Neo4j indexes do not store `null` values, and the planner must be able to rule out any unset properties in order to use an index.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* Neo4j indexes do not store `null` values, and the planner must be able to rule out any entities with properties containing `null` values in order to use an index.
```

`unset` can be interpreted as the property not existing altogether.
